---
title: Mean Field Variational Inference
tags:
  - machine-learning
---

## Preliminaries

Some key (but non-exhaustive) concepts to be familiar with to help with derivations and general intuition when dealing with topics in structured representation learning!

### Statistical Inference as Optimization

Variational auto-encoders (VAEs) on a high level are composed of the following:
1. Encoder ( $ \phi $ ): learn the $\mu, \sigma $ for $ z \sim \mathcal{N}(\mu, \sigma^2) $ so that we can sample from $q_{\phi}(z|x)$
2. Decoder ( $ \theta $ ): learn a representation of the observations $ \tilde x \sim p_{\theta}(x | z) $

Variational inference (VI) is an algorithm for learning the parameters $ \theta $ and $ \phi $ for approximating the mapping from the inputs / observations $ x $ to a process generating such inputs $ p(x) $ (true distribution).

To generate samples $ \tilde x^{(i)} \sim p_{\theta}(x) $ that look like $ x^{(i)} $:
1. Sample from the prior: $ z^{(i)} \sim p_{\theta}(z) $
2. Sample from the conditional likelihood: $ x^{(i)} \sim p_{\theta}(x|z) $

### Re-parameterization trick

In VAEs, the encoder determines the distribution of the latent variable $ z $. In order to be able to differentiate through those samples generated by the encoder network, we can re-parameterize the $ z$'s to be a linear transformation of a pre-determined distribution like a Gaussian where $ \epsilon \sim N(0, 1) $: 
$$
 z = \sigma \cdot \epsilon + \mu \text{ such that } z \sim \mathcal{N}(\mu, \sigma) 
$$
 so that we can differentiate through the encoder outputs.

### Bayes Theorem

Given prior (assumptions about our observations) $ p_{\theta}(z) $, posterior (discriminative model) $p_{\theta}(z|x) $, likelihood (generative model) $p_{\theta}(x|z) $, and joint $ p_{\theta}(z, x) $ processes:

$$
p_{\theta}(x|z) p_{\theta}(z) = p_{\theta}(z, x) = p_{\theta}(z|x) p_{\theta}(x)
$$

### Inference on $ z $

We want to learn a posterior distribution over latent (un-observable) variables $ z $. The MCMC approach to doing so is via Bayesian inference:

$$
p_{\theta}(z|x) = \frac{p_{\theta}(z)p_{\theta}(x|z)}{\int p_{\theta}(z)p_{\theta}(x|z)dz}
$$

Notice that the marginal distribution in the denominator becomes intractable for $|z| $ very large.

In VI, we instead learn the parameters $ \phi $ to an approximate posterior $ q_{\phi}(z) $ restricted to a tractable family of distributions that is factorizable (aka 'mean-field'). We do stochastic optimization by maximizing the an objective representing a lower bound on the log marginal likelihood:  ELBO.

Check out my JAX implementation of a VAE trained on a toy MNIST classification task here.

### $ \log{p(.)} $

Deep learning algorithms often operate on log probabilities for numerical stability (i.e. no nans). The intuition is that when multiplying probabilities (i.e. p_i $ \in [0, 1] $ ), they generally (with the exception of $ p_i = 1. $ ) become smaller. However, this becomes a problem if there is limited precision available to represent such small values in the machines executing our computations. It is therefore easier to compute larger magnitudes with more precision, i.e. $ log(p_1 p_2) = log(p_1) + log(p_2) $ where $ \log p_i < 0$.

### Jensen's Inequality

Let $ f(x) $ be a convex function. Then,

$$
\mathbb{E}[f(x)] \geq f(\mathbb{E}[x])
$$

### KL Divergence

Let $p, q $ be the true and learned distributions respectively. KL is a measure of the number of bits $ \log^{-1}(2)$ required to morph one distribution to the other, and we generally minimize this during optimization. There are two forms, the latter of which is utilized in VI:
- Forward KL ("mode covering"): $ KL(p(x) || q(z)) = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} p(x) \log \frac{p(x)}{q(x)}dx $. Notice that since $ q(x) $ is in the denominator, if it is small, the penalty would sum up to be very large. Thus $q(x) $ "covers" as much of the support $ p(x) \neq 0 $ as possible, assigning the highest density to the lowest areas of $ p(x) $.
- Reverse KL ("mode seeking"): $ KL(q(x) || p(z)) = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} q(x) \log \frac{q(x)}{p(x)}dx $. Since $ p(x) $ is in the denominator, it cannot be small when $q(x) $ if non-zero. Thus, the algorithm ends up finding "modes", i.e. high-density areas, since we don't have a division by zero error if $q(x) = 0$.

## Derivation of ELBO

### Training Objective

The VI objective is to minimize the KL-divergence between our approximate and true posterior distribution:

$$
\begin{aligned}KL\Big[ q_{\phi}(z|x) || p_{\theta}(z|x) \Big] &= \int q_{\phi}(z|x) \log{\frac{q_\phi(z|x)}{p_{\theta}(z|x)}}dz \\ &=  \int q_{\phi}(z|x) \log{\frac{p_{\theta}(x) q_\phi(z|x)}{p_{\theta}(z, x)}}dz \\ \end{aligned}
$$

We want to surface the likelihood term $ p_{\theta}(x|z) $ so that we can do standard maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) and also the KL term between the approximate posterior $ q_{\phi}(z|x) $ and prior $ p_{\theta}(z) $:

$$
\begin{aligned}&= \int q_{\phi}(z|x) \log p_{\theta}(x)dz + \int q_{\phi}(z|x) \log \frac{q_{\phi}(z|x)}{p_{\theta}(z,x)}dz \\ &= \int q_{\phi}(z|x) \log p_{\theta}(x)dz + \int q_{\phi}(z|x) \log \frac{q_{\phi}(z|x)}{p_{\theta}(x|z) p_{\theta}(z)}dz \end{aligned}
$$

Notice that since $ p_{\theta}(x) $ is a probability distribution **not** dependent on $z $, it effectively integrates out to 1.

$$
\begin{aligned} &= \log p_{\theta}(x) + \int q_{\phi}(z|x) \left[ \log \frac{q_{\phi}(z|x)}{p_{\theta}(x|z)} - \log p_{\theta}(z) \right] dz \\ &= \log p_{\theta}(x) + \int q_{\phi}(z|x) \log \frac{q_{\phi}(z|x)}{p_{\theta}(z)} dz -  \int q_{\phi}(z|x) \log p_{\theta}(x|z) dz \\ &= \log p_{\theta}(x) + \mathbb{E}_{z \sim q_{\phi}(z|x)}\left[ \log \frac{q_{\phi}(z|x)}{p_{\theta}(z)}dz \right]  - \mathbb{E}_{z \sim q_{\phi}(z|x)} \left[ \log p_{\theta}(x|z) \right] \end{aligned}
$$

The final two terms represent the **negative** ELBO, which exactly works out to be our optimizer's training objective of minimizing -log-likelihood + KL.

$$
\begin{aligned} KL\Big[ q_{\phi}(z|x) || p_{\theta}(z|x) \Big] &= \log p_{\theta}(x) + KL\left[ q_{\phi}(z|x) || p_{\theta}(z)\right] - \text{log likelihood of observations} \\ &= \log p_{\theta}(x) -ELBO \end{aligned}
$$

The marginal log likelihood of the real data $\log p_{\theta}(x) $ is fixed w.r.t. the variational parameters $\phi $, so *minimizing* KL(approx. data distribution || true data distribution) == *maximizing* $ ELBO $ (or *minimizing* $-ELBO $ ).

#### Why is the ELBO term a lower bound to the evidence?

Notice that there are TWO KL terms, one inside the ELBO and another as an overall regularizer, and $ KL \geq 0 $:

$$
\begin{aligned}  \log p_{\theta}(x) &=  \text{log likelihood of observations} - \text{KL(approx. post || prior)} + KL\Big[ q_{\phi}(z|x) || p_{\theta}(z|x) \Big] \\ &= ELBO + KL\text{(approx. posterior || true posterior)} \\ &\geq ELBO  \end{aligned}
$$

By Jensen's inequality, that ELBO is therefore a lower bound on the marginal log likelihood

$$
\begin{aligned}  \log p_{\theta}(x) &= \log \mathbb{E}_{z \sim q_{\phi}(z|x)} \left[ p_{\theta}(x|z) \right] \\ &\geq \mathbb{E}_{z \sim q_{\phi}(z|x)} \left[ \log p_{\theta}(x|z) \right]  \end{aligned}
$$

which makes sense to optimize for this quantity: if the KL divergence is zero, then our bound on $  \log p_{\theta}(x) $ would be tight!

## Additional Resources

If you are interested in looking at more advanced topics, I really enjoyed the following slides/papers/blogs:

- OG Tutorial on VAEs
- Variational Inference Tutorial
- Extensive summary of gradient estimators
- Writeup on mean field methods
- ELBO Surgery
